Rewards are processed and motivated action is produced in a reliable manner. Most often models and frameworks of reward processing propose that reward preferences and related reward sensitivity (RS) to be invariant across contexts. Recent data obtained from subjects across specific contexts has shown this not to be the case. For example, it has been shown the expression of reward discrimination and incentive contrast can differ depending upon context. Missing from the data is an examination of specific measures of reward processing taken from different contexts and identical subjects. We tested the same cohort of male and female rats between two contexts used in behavioral neuroscience experiments (home cage and operant chamber) and used identical sucrose solutions to assess key elements of RS (e.g., reward discrimination and incentive contrast). We performed a correlational analysis completing sets of Pearsons’s correlation coefficients to determine relations between variables within and between contexts. Females showed a greater number and diversity of relations and these were sensitive to behavioral context and internal state. Males had fewer significant relations with greater stability, especially when moving between different physiological states. Surprisingly, no significant relationships between the two experimental contexts were found for either sexes. Overall, it appears that female rats enhanced RS could arise partially due to the greater connectivity among the components of reward processing and how these components operate together and change across contexts. This form of environmental gating may work by altering the reward value from one context to another. Context variance of reward value and related reward responses is demonstrated and future data acquisition can take this important aspect of RS into consideration.
